Progress Report June 2021 (#288)
yuzu-emu/yuzu-emu.github.io: site/content/entry/yuzu-progress-report-jun-2021/index.md

Due to some issues found in `Super Mario Odyssey`, the option is disabled by default. We plan to introduce a more robust version in the future. 
It is expected to be enabled by default then.

While previous `Disable Dynamic Resolution` mods can now be disabled, we recommend keeping them, not only for picture quality purposes, but also to reduce unnecessary 
resource use by avoiding creating new textures after each resolution change.

## One does not simply fastmem into Windows

This was a very exciting month as we were able to [implement `fastmem`](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6422), a technique that provides a considerable performance boost by reducing the CPU load when accessing memory within yuzu.
Instead of emulating the Nintendo Switch's Memory Management Unit (`MMU`) through software, yuzu is now able to use the host PC `MMU` to decode memory addresses. This reduces the latency and size of the code of this operation, allowing for a more efficient use of the instruction cache (used to store instructions within the CPU and speed up the fetching stage).

> Originally, implementing fastmem in yuzu wasn't considered an option as there was a technical limitation in the Windows OS, but thanks to some changes in the API introduced in Windows 10 version 1803, it finally became viable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Originally, implementing `fastmem` in yuzu wasn't considered an option as there was a technical limitation in the Windows OS, but thanks to some changes in the API introduced in Windows 10 version 1803, it finally became viable.
```

However, due to a lack of documentation of this feature (thanks Microsoft), our devs didn't know they could use it.
We'd like to thank [BreadFish64](https://github.com/BreadFish64/) for informing our devs about this change, and [bylaws](https://github.com/bylaws) for [updating Microsoft's documentation regarding this behaviour](https://github.com/MicrosoftDocs/sdk-api/pull/799). 
As previously mentioned, this feature is incompatible with Windows versions older than 1803. Using an older Windows version will cause yuzu to fallback to the old `MMU` implementation — although this requirement could change in the future.
If you are interested in a more detailed explanation of how it works and the limitations that prevented its implementation, feel free to read the [dedicated article for fastmem](https://yuzu-emu.org/entry/yuzu-fastmem/).

{{< single-title-imgs
    "Some of the measured performance gains, in FPS"
    "./fastmem1.png"
    "./fastmem2.png"
    >}}

> Shortly afterwards, [toastunlimited](https://github.com/lat9nq) noticed there was a bug in our MinGW builds, resulting in fastmem not working.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Shortly afterwards, [toastunlimited](https://github.com/lat9nq) noticed there was a bug in our MinGW builds, resulting in `fastmem` not working.
```

After Project Hades is finished, there are plans to implement performance optimizations on the ASTC GPU accelerated decoder.

Previous to this work, [a toggle to disable the GPU accelerated decoder](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6464) was added for debugging purposes.
It’s no longer needed, but if anyone is curious about how much of a difference decoding with the CPU makes, the option is in `Emulation > Configure… > Graphics > 
Accelerate ASTC texture decoding`.

By [avoid creating image views for blits for different bytes per block, ](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6469) Rodrigo solved crashes experienced by Unreal Engine 4 
games on Vulkan.

Speaking about blits, [vonchenplus](https://github.com/vonchenplus) found out our previous way of handling out of bounds texture blits wasn’t accurate enough, causing 
rendering glitches in games like `DRAGON QUEST III The Seeds of Salvation`.
[Adding an offset to the source texture address](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6531) puts this bug to rest.

{{< single-title-imgs
    "No more acne! (DRAGON QUEST III: The Seeds of Salvation)"
    "./blitbug.png"
    "./blitfix.png"
    >}}

> Some games running in Vulkan like `Super Smash Bros. Ultimate` or `A Hat in Time` can cause loops decoding textures, resulting in `Out of Bounds` access on an array, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some games running in Vulkan, like `Super Smash Bros. Ultimate` or `A Hat in Time`, can cause loops decoding textures, resulting in `Out of Bounds` access on an array, 
```

potentially leading to a crash, and breaking our Flatpak support.
[As preemptive work](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6410), [toastUnlimited](https://github.com/lat9nq) added a `break` safeguard, and now Flatpaks work as intended.
Having less crashes is always better, right?

## General changes and bugfixes

`discord-rpc`, the submodule in charge of handling Discord’s `Rich Presence` “Now Playing” feature, [was updated](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6484) by 

> [Vortex](https://github.com/CaptV0rt3x) to the last version before it was deprecated in favour of a closed-source alternative named `GameSDK` which of course we can’t use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Vortex](https://github.com/CaptV0rt3x) to the last version before it was deprecated in favour of a closed-source alternative named `GameSDK` which, of course, we can’t use.
```

> Since discord-rpc still is compatible with Rich Presence, this update should provide more stable reporting in your Discord Status.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since `discord-rpc` still is compatible with `Rich Presence`, this update should provide more stable reporting in your Discord Status.
```

Vortex also [updated `httplib`](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6486), removing the need for previous fixes, solving issues with token verification and 
Compatibility Report uploading.

> We previously mentioned Flatpak support. [liushuyu](https://github.com/liushuyu) requested [Flathub](https://flathub.org/home) to add yuzu to their repositories, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We previously mentioned Flatpak support. [liushuyu](https://github.com/liushuyu) requested that [Flathub](https://flathub.org/home) add yuzu to their repositories, 
```

> officially adding [another installation option](https://flathub.org/apps/details/org.yuzu_emu.yuzu) to our Linux users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
officially providing [another installation option](https://flathub.org/apps/details/org.yuzu_emu.yuzu) for our Linux users.
```

Maide implemented the `GetAudioOutPlayedSampleCount` service, making `Ninja Gaiden` series games playable!

{{< single-title-imgs
    "Ninja Gaiden series"
    "./ninja1.png"
    "./ninja2.png"
    "./ninja3.png"
  >}}

[german77](https://github.com/german77) has been having fun rewriting how analog input is handled by yuzu.

> The old method handled each analog joystick in a separate thread, periodically updating the angle held by the user. This is not only imprecise, it’s also slower and it was 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The old method handled each analog joystick in a separate thread, periodically updating the angle held by the user. This is not only imprecise, but also slower and was 
```

> found out to cause data races, eventually leading to random crashes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
found to cause data races, eventually leading to random crashes.
```

[By removing the need for separate threads, and using timestamps the game can consult at its own request](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6389), the data race is 

> avoided, eliminating the crashes, movement in games is considerably smoother, and resource utilization is lower, helping performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
avoided. This eliminates the crashes, results in considerably smoother movement, and lowers resource utilization, helping performance.
```

> A victory in all scenarios.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A victory in all scenarios!
```

> [Thanks to changes made upstream,](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6450), by updating the `SDL` version in use [toastUnlimited](https://github.com/lat9nq) solved 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Thanks to changes made upstream](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6450) and then updating the `SDL` version in use [toastUnlimited](https://github.com/lat9nq). resolved 
```

> [Thanks to changes made upstream](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6450) and then updating the `SDL` version in use [toastUnlimited](https://github.com/lat9nq). resolved 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Thanks to changes made upstream](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6450), [toastUnlimited](https://github.com/lat9nq) was able to update the `SDL` version in use, resolving 
```

crashes experienced by Linux users right when opening yuzu.

> [kilaye](https://github.com/clementgallet) has been giving us a hand in an often forgotten area of yuzu, the `yuzu-cmd` binary, which is intended as an SDL2 alternative of 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[kilaye](https://github.com/clementgallet) has been giving us a hand in an often forgotten area of yuzu, the `yuzu-cmd` binary, which is intended as an SDL2 alternative to 
```

the most commonly used `yuzu` Qt interface binary.
[OpenGL wasn’t rendering](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6412) due to recent changes applied, and a bad initialization of 
[touch_from_button](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6411) was causing crashes.

> All fixed thanks to kilaye’s work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All were fixed thanks to kilaye’s work.
```

> While on an SDL2 rush, kilaye also [implemented an SDL2 audio backend](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6418) as an alternative to our cubeb backend in use by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While on an SDL2 rush, kilaye also [implemented an SDL2 audio backend](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6418) as an alternative to our default cubeb backend.
```

> More work is needed to refine its performance and end-results, but having an easy to maintain multi-platform backend is never a bad idea.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
More work is needed to refine its performance and end-results, but having an easy-to-maintain, multi-platform backend is never a bad idea.
```

## Filesystem changes

toastUnlimited has been working along with [morph](https://github.com/Morph1984) to improve the experience of using the 
[Ultimate Mod Manager](https://github.com/ultimate-research/UltimateModManager) application with yuzu — a tool that allows one to mod `Super Smash Bros. Ultimate`.
First, toast added an option in the context menu of a game to support [dumping the RomFS to the SDMC subdirectory](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6471), while morph 

> [did the necessary changes](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6472) for this setup to work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[made the necessary changes](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6472) for this setup to work.
```

New users intending to use UMM only need to right click the game in yuzu’s game list and select `Dump RomFS > Dump RomFPS to SDMC`.

{{< imgs
	"./umm.png| "
  >}}

While [working on new debug options for the filesystem emulation](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6460), Morph also fixed certain DLCs that used to make 
`Xenoblade Chronicles 2` fail to load at boot with the previous implementation.
You can now run the game without major issues, even when fully updated.

When dumping RomFS to disk, there has to be enough free space. Morph 
[added a check to avoid users trying to dump without enough room.](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6451)

> Due to a bug in the Microsoft Visual C++ (or just MSVC) compiler, a crash could happen when trying to access folders recursively in order to load game dumps on yuzu’s game 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Due to a bug in the Microsoft Visual C++ (or just MSVC) compiler, a crash could happen when trying to access folders recursively in order to load game dumps in yuzu’s game 
```

list.

> Morph fixed it by changing the `recursive_directory_iterator` class [for the `directory_iterator` class.](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6448) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Morph fixed it by replacing the `recursive_directory_iterator` class [with the `directory_iterator` class](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6448).
```

## UI changes

> Some changes by Epicboy have been done to the title bar. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some changes have been done to the title bar by epicboy. 
```

> To begin with, now games [will display if they are built for the 32-bit or 64-bit instruction set.](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6535)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To begin with, games will now [display if they are built for the 32-bit or 64-bit instruction set.](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6535)
```

> This will help determine if Unsafe CPU should be used to get the previously mentioned performance optimization.                                                .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will help determine when `Unsafe CPU` should be used to get the previously mentioned performance optimization.
```

Additionally, [the GPU vendor will now be displayed too.](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6502)

> This is not only for debugging purposes or for providing better support to users, it also clarifies which driver is in use on systems running multiple GPUs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is not only for debugging purposes or providing better support to users, it also clarifies which driver is in use on systems running multiple GPUs.
```

One would think there are only 3 vendors per API, but that’s far from reality.

> [By checking the list](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6502/files) you can see there are many different reported vendors for different needs, including CPU 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[By checking the list](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6502/files), you can see there are many different reported vendors for different needs, including CPU 
```

software rendering drivers.

> As their first Pull Request for yuzu, [OZ](https://github.com/OZtistic) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For their first Pull Request with yuzu, [OZ](https://github.com/OZtistic) 
```

[corrected the size of the Per-Game configuration window and removed the useless “help” button](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6514) in the top right corner.

{{< imgs
	"./oz.png| Thanks OZ!"
  >}}

> toastUnlimited added a new option to the right click context menu on any game on yuzu’s game list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
toastUnlimited added a new option to the right click context menu on any game in yuzu’s game list.
```

> You can now [right click a game and start it from there](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6426) with any custom per-game configuration you may have, or start it with 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can now [right click a game and launch it](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6426) with any custom per-game configuration you may have, or with 
```

the current global settings.

{{< imgs
	"./start.png| Quick way to test two different sets of settings"
  >}}

> Column sizes of the game list used to constantly resize during updates or DLC installation to NAND, resulting in an extreme width that made the game list uncomfortable to use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Column sizes in the game list used to constantly resize during updates or DLC installation to NAND, resulting in an extreme width that made the game list uncomfortable to use.
```

Maide [put a stop to this](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6402), improving the quality of life of our UI.

[Kewlan](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6413) is back at it, this time 
[preventing users from inputting invalid characters in text windows,](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6413) for example when creating a new Input Profile.

{{< imgs
	"./text.png| No more 1337 talk"
  >}}

## Future projects

With Project Hades [(our new shader decompiler)](https://yuzu-emu.org/entry/yuzu-hades/), Rodrigo continues with his crazy experiments, bunnei has yet more kernel changes in the oven, and german77 and Morph continue
to work on their top secret projects.

> More GPU related optimizations are underway. Users should keep a keen eye on the horizon.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
More GPU related optimizations are underway, and users should keep a keen eye on the horizon.
```

> That’s all folks! As always, [thank you for your kind attention.](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=88NM0bgJfLM)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That’s all folks! As always, we hope you keep enjoying yuzu.
```
Let's nix this reference, especially if it's involving any spoilers.
